
Financial literacy Meaning : Financial literacy is the knowledge and ability to manage your money in a way that helps you grow stability and feel confident and resilient. Key aspects of financial literacy are budgeting, saving and managing debt.
Financial literacy is the confident understanding of concepts including saving, budgeting, investing and debt that leads to informed financial decisions and stability.
Not only does increasing your knowledge of money matters make it easier to manage your finances, but it can also help you lower your stress levels: Knowledge of key financial concepts is tied to less financial stress and anxiety, according to a Global Financial Literacy Excellence Center survey on financial anxiety.
In other words, increasing your financial savvy can help you boost your overall well-being. Read on to learn more about what financial literacy is, why it's important and steps you can take to become more financially literate.
Why Is Financial Literacy Important?
Financial literacy is important because it supports financial well-being, or a confidence in your ability to manage your money well. Everyone experiences financial ups and downs, but financially literate people may be more likely to:
Manage money with a budget
Save more money for the future
Manage credit well and avoid unnecessary debt
Feel financially prepared for emergencies
Feel less stressed about money
Feel more financially secure overall
Key Components of Financial Literacy
Here are the five foundational pieces of financial literacy to learn about first:
Budgeting
Controlling overspending and making conscious choices about where your money goes are crucial for building financial stability. A budget is a blueprint for how you'll get there. It's a plan for how you'll direct your income toward affording your expenses, live within your means and meet your savings goals.
How to start budgeting:
Learn about how to make a budget.
Once you make a budget, follow tips to stick to your budget.
Learn about different budgeting methods and top-rated mobile budgeting apps.
Saving
Spending less than you earn and putting the difference into savings helps you build security and achieve goals down the line.
Generally speaking, your first order of business should be setting up an emergency savings fund and aiming to keep around three to six months' worth of expenses socked away. Beyond setting aside money for unexpected expenses such as urgent car repairs, saving in advance can help you afford things you need or want, from holiday gift purchases to next summer's vacation, without going into debt.
Fact: According to the Federal Reserve, 54% of all adults had three months' worth of emergency savings in 2023. The average savings account balance for families was $8,000 in 2022, according to the latest Survey of Consumer Finances study.
Investing
Beyond saving for the short term, start investing for large future goals, such as retirement.
Managing Debt
For better or worse, debt is a common part of financial life. People borrow to achieve any number of goals. You might take out student loans to attend college, an auto loan when you need a new car or a mortgage when you're ready to buy a house. You might also use a credit card or a personal loan when you want to finance a purchase and pay it back over time.
But debt can also be destructive to your finances. If you fall too deeply into debt, whatever the reason, getting out can be challenging—plus get in the way of reaching your other financial goals.
Building Credit
Financial literacy can help you grow and protect your credit score. By learning what impacts your credit, you're better situated to make borrowing choices that contribute to a high score, and to avoid choices that can do damage.
The Power of Financial Literacy
Getting up to speed on the basics of personal money management can make navigating financial decisions easier. That can mean keeping a close eye on your bank and credit card accounts so you're aware of potential fraud as soon as possible, or being able to recover from a costly unexpected car repair quickly thanks to ample cash savings.
Ultimately, the best outcome of your commitment to financial literacy will be increased confidence in yourself. When you have the knowledge to make informed decisions, you'll trust your ability to make sound financial moves and avoid too much debt or risk. From there, you can create and pursue financial goals that will most support your vision for a happy life.